---
layout: post
title: The Pain Scale
---

I'm recovering from a herniated disc in the L4-L5 region. Spinal cord pain is
some of the worst I've ever experienced. At the time of injury it's all hot
pokers and unavoidable spasms paired with inconsolable throbbing and paralyzing
panic. I'm learning that the recovery process is another kind of pain in
itselfâ€“ slow, full of regressions, and depressing. There's a mental
anguish which grows from a pattern of happy pain-free days followed by sad
pain-full days. Just when you think the back is starting to heal, and the
inflamation subsides, and the herniation shrinks, you can re-tweak the injury in
the most innocent of ways. Rising too quickly after bending over to tie your
shoe can ruin your day. Reaching a leg into the car just a little too far before
siting down can result in spending the weekend on the couch. The up-and-down
nature of the injury toys with your emotional stability.

A physical therapy office asked me to fill out a pain scale. The scale starts at
0 and ends at 10. Each number is assigned a short description to distinguish the
levels of pain: "disabling, you can't perform your normal day to day
activities", or "moderate, throbbing that subsides with rest". During my visit I
found it difficult to fill out this pain questionnaire. The scale and its
descriptors seemed to skew heavily toward the lower numbers and the higher
numbers, ignoring the middle. How can you distinguish between a 4, 5, 6, or 7
when their brief descriptions all include the word "painful"? Putting aside the
devious origins of the pain scale- have a read up on the Sackler family and
Perdue pharma, I thought it would be a fun exercise to write my own personalized
pain scale as described by my life experiences.

0 - I am pain free.

1 - I have a paper cut on my hand. The pain isn't consistent, and it's extremely
mild. Nothing about my day to day is interrupted, and only certain activities
even remind me about the pain- such as washing my hands.

2 - I stub my toe. While quite painful in the brief moment after the stubbing,
the intensity and duration of the pain is negligible. I have a dull ache for the
rest of the day, but only when I'm walking around. The pain doesn't weigh on my
mind at all.

3 - I sunburn myself badly after refusing to reapply sunscreen every few hours
at the lake. The pain is constant, but mild. Remedies like aloe or a cold beer
in the shade provide relief. Rest is generally not interrupted. While constantly
uncomfortable, the pain is extremely tolerable.

4 - I aggrevate my shoulder while swimming. Too many laps leads to muscle
tightening and inflamation around the capsule. The pain is intermittent, but
it's a noticeable ache. Medication and manual therapy alleviate most of the
discomfort, and I can rest assured that the pain will subside in a few days at
most. My daily activities mostly aren't impacted, though I won't swim again for
a few days. I don't linger on the pain throughout the day.

5 -
I slice my thumb to the bone with a knife while making toast. The pain is immediate
and intense enough to trigger a fight or flight response. When the adrenaline
wears off

6 -
I sprain my ankle playing soccer. The injury is painful in the moment, and
worsens over time as swelling takes over. Medication helps a little, but there's
a constant level of unavoidable discomfort. My daily activites are limited- I'm
unable to continue sport or exercise. Rest is the best prescription, but I'm
able to still engage in most non-active activities. The pain is not constantly
distracting, but it is ever-present and occasionally.


7 - I fall off a mountain bicycle speed and hit my head. I don't break any bones
or tear any muscles, but the immediate and future consequences are measurable.
Most of my body aches for many days following the event, even at rest. Pain
medication is almost a necessity to enable basic daily activities. The pain is
quite distracting and makes it difficult to engage in restful activites like
reading or television.

8 - I herniate a disc. The pain is paralyzing in the moment, and barely subsides
after the immediate injury. It requires a concerning amount of dangerous pain
medication to take the edge off. Performing even the most mundane activites such
as going to the bathroom, or laying down on the couch is extremely
uncomfortable. Every movement requires thorough planning and execution, or the
pain worsens. In addition to the physical pain, there is a substantial amount of
mental torment: nothing you do will make the pain go away and you cannot do
anything without causing pain, so you have nothing to distract yourself from the
pain, so you cannot think of much else besides the pain, so you go around and
around in a mental downspiral of pain.

9 - I am actively dying. Consider a compound fracture that slices skin and
exposes bone and other internals, or an unbroken fall from height that breaks
bone and ruptures organs. The pain is all-encompassing, and I can do nothing but
agonize about the current circumstances. No amount of pain medication will
resolve the problem, and I have to seek medical attention immediately or risk
death.

10 - I hold my dog in my arms as she takes her last breath.
