---
layout: post
description: Take the time to build it right.
---

# Build stone castles

A stone castle houses a stable, some sentry towers, a dungeon, a great hall,
battlements, a barracks, and maybe a palace, or any number of other medieval
niceties. Many of these structures take quite a while to build, and some can be
quite complicated. Isn’t the easier solution to construct basic mud structures
instead? Mud can form a stable. Mud can stack a tower or reinforce a dungeon or
raise a barracks. This would certainly be faster, require less planning, and be
more amenable to change; after all, mud can be easily reformed or scraped away.
Artisans aren’t even required to procure and architect the masonry because mud
huts are elementary enough for any journeyman to tackle. In light of all the
time, energy, and cost saving measures, why do we not see more mud castles?

Consider that mud has a fairly finite limit in structural integrity. Large,
multiple-story structures made of mud don’t exist because, beyond a certain
size, such structures would crumble. At some inflection point, any attempt to
add to or change an existing mud structure will inflict breakage. If one is
fortunate, the breaks occur only on the mud structure under construction. If
unfortunate, the structure is intertwined in the support systems of others and
breakage happens everywhere at random.

The only possible way to construct an entirely mud castle is to scale down each
structure. And here lies the crucial point: diminished size coincides with
diminished effectiveness. A downsized great hall can no longer feast a village.
A small mud battlement can no longer defend the perimeter. A compact mud stable
cannot no longer contain the full array of beasts. What then, is the purpose of
a having a castle at all?

While a castle that is too small is ineffective, there exists an inescapable
cost to a larger castle: complexity. Feeding a handful of denizens can be done
on a whim. Feeding a legion of soldiers, peasants, and craftsmen, however,
requires dedicated cooks and coordinated meal times and hunting parties.
Stabling some horses requires a single stablehand. Stabling a team of horses
requires stablemasters, shoemakers, muckrakers, breakers, and breeders.
Defending a mud wall requires a handful of soldiers. Defending a battlement
requires a garrison with blacksmiths, smelters, fletchers, and commanders. The
demands of a fully operational castle do not scale linearly, but instead
experience a rather steep curve.

If we accept that castles are ineffective under a certain size, that we cannot
build sizeable castles from mud, and that larger castles introduce unavoidable
complexity, we must also accept the associated consequences. Stone is harder to
form than mud and requires the deft hand of an artisan. Architecting a castle
requires substantial time and energy. Supporting the complex interactions of
inhabitants is a never-ending commitment.

A castle’s needs are guaranteed to change as time passes. When those changes
arrive, a well-constructed, well-architected, and well-understood castle can
adapt. Where a collection of mud huts must be razed and started anew, a castle
can repurpose structures, extend boundaries, and retrain behaviors.

When the rains come, and the winds blow, and the invaders attack, I know where I
would rather live. (In case you missed it, I'm talking about software.)
