---
layout: post
title: Experience Report, Kinesis Advantage
description: Kinesis Advantage experience review.
---

# Experience Report: Kinesis Advantage

I want to share my experience working with the [Kinesis Advantage2](
https://kinesis-ergo.com/shop/advantage2/) in the context of a professional
software engineer. But first, a story:

During my high school years I typed a lot. I spent an inordinate amount of time
in front of the keyboard writing class papers, playing online video games, on
AIM with friends, or programming. Eventually my wrists and knuckles started to
hurt.  Over time the pain progressed enough to start negatively affecting my day
to day. Laying off the keyboard was clearly not an option for that particularly
immature phase of life, so I went looking for pain relief.

## QWERTY is Hurty

It turns out, QWERTY is more or less designed around trial and error. Early
layouts place the keys in alphabetical order, which proves to be extremely
limiting for the English alphabet. The interplay between mechanical arms and the
frequency of particular English letters causes the keyboard to jam regularly.
Layout designers spent many years reverse-engineering movement patterns to
ultimately land on QWERTY as the least likely to have a mechanical fault when
typing English sentences. In other words, the layout is optimized for "least
likely to jam".

Anyone who spends a lot of time with QWERTY can probably intuit this fact– it
seems almost designed to send your fingers across every corner of the keyboard
for each word. It's really uncomfortable, and is likely the contributor to a lot
of pain. At least that's what anecdotal evidence from anonymous people on the
internet said, which was convincing enough for my highschool-caliber judgement.
With this sliver of hope I started hunting for less-painful alternatives to
QWERTY.

## Tradeoffs

If you enumerate the pain points of QWERTY, it's a wonder anyone adopted the
layout at all:

- an enormous amount of awkward finger movements via over stretching and
  "clawing" fingers
- constantly removing fingers from "home row" to type even the most common words
- many common letter combinations are typed by a single hand
- a disproportionate amount of words are typed with only the left hand

In the 1930s a man named August Dvorak patented a layout with the expressed goal
of reducing errors when typing in English. His "DVORAK" layout, while not
explicitly focused on reducing pain, seemed like an excellent solution to my
problem:

- type as many common words as possible by alternating keystrokes between hands
- keep the most commonly used keys on "home row" to reduce finger movement
- place the least commonly used keys in the most difficult to reach positions
- require more typing from the right hand because most people are right handed


## I DID IT!

I started the arduous task of re-learning how to type. It was miserable at
first. It took about 2 weeks of practice to be able to type without glancing
down at my fingers. My competitive gaming performance was underwhelming, to say
the least, and homework drained even more of my free time simply because I
stumbled my way through the typing.

It took about a month to return to my previous QWERTY words-per-minute.
Eventually, as promised, the pain started to subside. As an added bonus I was
able to drastically surpass (by over 30%) my QWERTY performance when typing in
DVORAK. All was well in the world.

## What's Best vs What's Known

If you have reached this far in the story, you should be pretty upset that I
haven't even begun to talk about the Kinesis Advantage. It's a fantastic
keyboard. The ergonomic qualities are unparalleled: a split keyboard to help
alleviate tight chest muscles and uncomfortable wrist angles, a thumb-optimized
layout to reduce awkward QWERTY overreach, improved key-well geometry to reduce
finger fatigue, vertical layout to better reflect normal finger movement, and
everything is compact enough to place your mouse at a more comfortable reach.
The onboarding macro system is impressively powerful, and the keyboard itself is
100% reconfigurable with a little effort. The build quality is exactly what you
would hope for in a $350 keyboard, and you are able to customize which CherryMX
switches come pre-installed. I can't recommend this keyboard, though.

You see, I don't type in DVORAK anymore. I abandoned the experiment a few months
after reaching proficiency. Part of the difficulty in learning a new layout
comes from the regular back-pedaling to the old layout. Almost every keyboard in
the world becomes unfamiliar and frustrating. Instead of achieving excellence in
one layout, you end up with a high error rate in both layouts. Most of your
smartphone apps? QWERTY. Any public or community keyboard? QWERTY. Any of your
friends' or coworkers' devices? QWERTY. That booth at a conference which needs
to collect your information? QWERTY. Airline or hotel check-in counters? QWERTY.
Restaurant terminals? QWERTY. And so on, and so on.

The Kinesis suffers from the aforementioned problem and also has some additional
disadvantages. It's feasible to reconfigure all the QWERTY keyboards you
regularly encounter to DVORAK, but you can't physically reconfigure the location
and shape of the keys on those keyboards. The vertical columns and
thumb-oriented layout are inarguably more ergonomic, but you are going to spend
a very long time (if not forever) straddling two keyboard layouts. As a remote
worker, I disconnect my laptop from a primary workstation at least a few times a
week. During these periods I am working inefficiently on a now-unfamiliar
layout. This problem is only magnified by my Vim usage, which relies heavily on
muscle memory, and would likely afflict Emacs users in kind.

## Conclusion

After an intense 2 week effort to familiarize myself with the new layout, I
ultimately failed (and lost quite a bit of productive work in the meantime).
Perhaps an engineer that spends all of their time at a primary workstation may
fare better after the initial adjustment period. For now, though, optimizing for
"least likely to jam" is my unfortunate reality– even if a better alternative
exists.
