---
layout: post
title: The Pain Scale
---

I'm recovering from a herniated disc in the L4-L5 region. Spinal cord pain is
some of the worst I've ever experienced. At the time of injury it's all hot
pokers and unavoidable spasms paired with inconsolable throbbing and paralyzing
panic. I'm learning that the recovery process is another kind of pain in
itselfâ€“ slow, full of regressions, and depressing. There's a mental
anguish which grows from a pattern of happy pain-free days followed by sad
pain-full days. Just when you think the back is starting to heal, and the
inflammation subsides, and the herniation shrinks, you can re-tweak the injury in
the most innocent of ways. Rising too quickly after bending over to tie your
shoe can ruin your day. Reaching a leg into the car just a little too far before
siting down can result in spending the weekend on the couch. The up-and-down
nature of the injury toys with my emotional stability.

A physical therapy office asked me to fill out a pain scale. The scale starts at
0 and ends at 10. Each number is assigned a short description to distinguish the
levels of pain: "disabling, you can't perform your normal day-to-day
activities", or "moderate, throbbing that subsides with rest". During my visit I
found it difficult to fill out this pain questionnaire. The scale and its
descriptors seemed to skew heavily toward the lower numbers and the higher
numbers, ignoring the middle. How can you distinguish between a 4, 5, 6, or 7
when their brief descriptions all include the word "painful"? Putting aside the
devious origins of the pain scale (have a read up on the Sackler family and
Purdue pharma) I thought it would be an interesting exercise to write my own
personalized pain scale as described by my life experiences.

0 - I am pain free.

1 - I have a paper cut on my hand. The pain isn't consistent, and it's extremely
mild. Nothing about my day-to-day is interrupted, and only certain activities
even remind me about the pain.

2 - I stub my toe. While quite painful in the brief moment after the stubbing,
the intensity and duration of the pain is negligible. I have a dull ache for the
rest of the day, but only when I'm walking around. The pain doesn't weigh on my
mind at all.

3 - I sunburn myself badly after refusing to reapply sunscreen every few hours
at the lake. The pain is constant, but mild. Remedies like aloe or a cold beer
in the shade provide relief. Rest is generally not interrupted. While constantly
uncomfortable, the pain is tolerable.

4 - I aggravate my shoulder while swimming. Too many laps leads to muscle
tightening and inflammation around the capsule. The pain is intermittent, but
it's a noticeable ache. Medication and manual therapy alleviate most of the
discomfort, and I can rest assured that the pain will subside in a few days at
most. My daily activities mostly aren't impacted, though I won't swim again for
a few days. I don't linger on the pain throughout the day.

5 - I slice my thumb to the bone with a knife while cutting frozen bread. The
pain is immediate and intense enough to trigger a fight or flight response. When
the adrenaline wears off, the throbbing stitches are a constant bother
throughout the day. The mental weight of near-constant pain is bearable,
however, because I'm still able to get through my normal day largely unhindered.

6 - I sprain my ankle playing soccer. The injury is painful in the moment, and
worsens over time as swelling takes over. Medication helps a little, but there's
a constant level of unavoidable discomfort. The mental taxation starts to take
its toll because my daily activities are limited. I'm unable to continue playing
sports or get much exercise at all due to the severity of the pain.

7 - I fall off a mountain bike at speed and hit my head, hard. I don't break any
bones or tear any muscles, but the immediate and future consequences are
measurable. Most of my body aches for many days following the event, even at
rest. Pain medication is almost a necessity to enable basic daily activities.
The pain is quite distracting and makes it difficult to engage in even restful
activities like reading or television. The mental burden starts to approach the
level of physical discomfort. How long am I going to be stuck immobile on this
couch?  When will I be able to move comfortably again, if at all?

8 - I herniate a disc. The pain is paralyzing in the moment, and barely subsides
after the immediate injury. It requires a concerning amount of dangerous pain
medication to take the edge off. Performing even the most mundane activities such
as going to the bathroom, or laying down on the couch is extremely
uncomfortable. Every movement requires thorough planning and execution, or the
pain worsens. In addition to the physical pain, there is a substantial amount of
mental torment. Nothing I do will make the pain go away and I cannot do anything
without causing pain, so there is nothing to distract from the pain, so I cannot
think of much else besides the pain, so I go around and around in a mental
down spiral of pain.

9 - I am actively dying. To be clear, I have never experienced this level of
pain, but I imagine the following might fit the category: consider a compound
fracture that slices skin and exposes bone and other internals, or an unbroken
fall from height that ruptures organs. The pain is all-encompassing, and you can
do nothing but agonize about the current circumstances. No amount of pain
medication will resolve the problem, and you have to seek medical attention
immediately or risk death.

10 - I hold my dog in my arms and look her in the eyes as she takes her last
breath.

Rest in peace, Ruby.
